Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
THE CURIOUS CASE OF
NEURAL TEXT DeGENERATION
Ari Holtzman†‡ Jan Buys§† Li Du† Maxwell Forbes†‡ Yejin Choi†‡
†Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering, University of Washington
‡Allen Institute for Artiﬁcial Intelligence
§Department of Computer Science, University of Cape Town
{ahai,dul2,mbforbes,yejin}@cs.washington.edu, jbuys@cs.uct.ac.za
ABSTRACT
Despite considerable advances in neural language modeling, it remains an open
question what the best decoding strategy is for text generation from a language
model (e.g. to generate a story). The counter-intuitive empirical observation is
that even though the use of likelihood as training objective leads to high quality
models for a broad range of language understanding tasks, maximization-based
decoding methods such as beam search lead to degeneration — output text that is
bland, incoherent, or gets stuck in repetitive loops.
To address this we propose Nucleus Sampling, a simple but effective method to
draw considerably higher quality text out of neural language models than previ-
ous decoding strategies. Our approach avoids text degeneration by truncating the
unreliable tail of the probability distribution, sampling from the dynamic nucleus
of tokens containing the vast majority of the probability mass.
To properly examine current maximization-based and stochastic decoding meth-
ods, we compare generations from each of these methods to the distribution of
human text along several axes such as likelihood, diversity, and repetition. Our re-
sults show that (1) maximization is an inappropriate decoding objective for open-
ended text generation, (2) the probability distributions of the best current language
models have an unreliable tail which needs to be truncated during generation and
(3) Nucleus Sampling is currently the best available decoding strategy for gener-
ating long-form text that is both high-quality — as measured by human evaluation
— and as diverse as human-written text.
Context: In a shocking finding, scientist discovered a herd of unicorns living in a remote, previously unexplored valley, 
in the Andes Mountains. Even more surprising to the researchers was the fact that the unicorns spoke perfect English.
Beam Search, b=32:
"The study, published in the Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America (PNAS), was conducted by researchers from the 
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México (UNAM) and 
the Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México 
(UNAM/Universidad Nacional Autónoma de 
México/Universidad Nacional Autónoma de 
México/Universidad Nacional Autónoma de 
México/Universidad Nacional Autónoma de ...”
Pure Sampling:
They were cattle called Bolivian Cavalleros; they live in a 
remote desert uninterrupted by town , and they speak huge, 
beautiful, paradisiacal Bolivian linguistic thing . They say, 
'Lunch, marge.' They don't tell what the lunch is, " director 
Professor Chuperas Omwell told Sky News. " They've only 
been talking to scientists, like we're being interviewed by TV 
reporters. We don't even stick around to be interviewed by 
TV reporters. Maybe that's how they figured out that they're 
cosplaying as the Bolivian Cavalleros. "
Figure 1: Even with substantial human context and the powerful GPT-2 Large language model,
Beam Search (size 32) leads to degenerate repetition (highlighted in blue) while pure sampling
leads to incoherent gibberish (highlighted in red). When b≥ 64, both GPT-2 Large and XL (774M
and 1542M parameters, respectively) prefer to stop generating immediately after the given context.
1 I NTRODUCTION
On February 14th 2019, OpenAI surprised the scientiﬁc community with an impressively high-
quality article about Ovid’s Unicorn, written by GPT-2. 1 Notably, the top-quality generations ob-
1https://openai.com/blog/better-language-models/
1
arXiv:1904.09751v2  [cs.CL]  14 Feb 2020

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
tained from the model rely on randomness in the decoding method, in particular through top-k sam-
pling that samples the next word from the top k most probable choices (Fan et al., 2018; Holtzman
et al., 2018; Radford et al., 2019), instead of aiming to decode text that maximizes likelihood.
In fact, decoding strategies that optimize for output with high probability, such as beam search, lead
to text that is incredibly degenerate, even when using state-of-the-art models such as GPT-2 Large,
as shown in Figure 1. This may seem counter-intuitive, as one would expect that good models
would assign higher probability to more human-like, grammatical text. Indeed, language models
do generally assign high scores to well-formed text, yet the highest scores for longer texts are often
generic, repetitive, and awkward. Figure 2 exposes how different the distribution of probabilities
assigned to beam search decoded text and naturally occurring text really are.
Perhaps equally surprising is the right side of Figure 1, which shows that pure sampling — sampling
directly from the probabilities predicted by the model — results in text that is incoherent and almost
unrelated to the context. Why is text produced by pure sampling so degenerate? In this work we
show that the “unreliable tail” is to blame. This unreliable tail is composed of tens of thousands of
candidate tokens with relatively low probability that are over-represented in the aggregate.
To overcome these issues we introduce Nucleus Sampling (§3.1). The key intuition of Nucleus
Sampling is that the vast majority of probability mass at each time step is concentrated in thenucleus,
a small subset of the vocabulary that tends to range between one and a thousand candidates. Instead
of relying on a ﬁxed top-k, or using a temperature parameter to control the shape of the distribution
without sufﬁciently suppressing the unreliable tail, we propose sampling from the top- p portion of
the probability mass, expanding and contracting the candidate pool dynamically.
In order to compare current methods to Nucleus Sampling, we compare vari-
ous distributional properties of generated text to the reference distribution, such
as the likelihood of veering into repetition and the perplexity of generated text.
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0 20 40 60 80 100
Probability
Timestep
Beam Search T ext is Less Surprising
Beam Search
Human
Beam Search
...to provide an overview of the 
current state-of-the-art in the field 
of computer vision and machine 
learning, and to provide an 
overview of the current
state-of-the-art in the field of
computer vision and machine 
learning, and to provide an
overview of the current 
state-of-the-art in the field of 
computer vision and machine
learning, and to provide an
overview of the current 
state-of-the-art in the field of 
computer vision and machine 
learning, and...
Human
...which grant increased life span
and three years warranty. The 
Antec HCG series consists of five 
models with capacities spanning 
from 400W to 900W. Here we 
should note that we have already 
tested the HCG-620 in a previous 
review and were quite satisfied 
With its performance. In today's 
review we will rigorously test the 
Antec HCG-520, which as its model
number implies, has 520W capacity 
and contrary to Antec's strong
beliefs in multi-rail PSUs is 
equipped...
Figure 2: The probability assigned to tokens gen-
erated by Beam Search and humans, given the
same context. Note the increased variance that
characterizes human text, in contrast with the end-
less repetition of text decoded by Beam Search.
The latter reveals that text generated by maxi-
mization or top-k sampling is too probable, in-
dicating a lack of diversity and divergence in
vocabulary usage from the human distribution.
On the other hand, pure sampling produces text
that is signiﬁcantly less likely than the gold,
corresponding to lower generation quality.
V ocabulary usage and Self-BLEU (Zhu 

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
2 B ACKGROUND
2.1 T EXT GENERATION DECODING STRATEGIES
A number of recent works have alluded to the disadvantages of generation by maximization, which
tend to generate output with high grammaticality but low diversity (Kulikov et al., 2019; Holtzman
et al., 2018; Fan et al., 2018). Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) have been a prominent
research direction (Yu et al., 2017; Xu et al., 2018), but recent work has shown that when qual-
ity and diversity are considered jointly, GAN-generated text fails to outperform generations from
language models (Caccia et al., 2018; Tevet et al., 2019; Semeniuta et al., 2018). Work on neural di-
alog systems have proposed methods for diverse beam search, using a task-speciﬁc diversity scoring
function or constraining beam hypotheses to be sufﬁciently different (Li et al., 2016a; Vijayakumar
et al., 2018; Kulikov et al., 2019; Pal et al., 2006). While such utility functions encourage desirable
properties in generations, they do not remove the need to choose an appropriate decoding strategy,
and we believe that Nucleus Sampling will have complementary advantages in such approaches.
Finally, Welleck et al. (2020) begin to address the problem of neural text degeneration through an
“unlikelihood loss”, which decreases training loss on repeated tokens and thus implicitly reduces
gradients on frequent tokens as well. Our focus is on exposing neural text degeneration and provid-
ing a decoding solution that can be used with arbitrary models, but future work will likely combine
training-time and inference-time solutions.
2.2 O PEN -ENDED VS DIRECTED GENERATION
Many text generation tasks are deﬁned through (input, output) pairs, such that the output is a con-
strained transformation of the input. Example applications include machine translation (Bahdanau
et al., 2015), data-to-text generation (Wiseman et al., 2017), and summarization (Nallapati et al.,
2016). We refer to these tasks as directed generation. Typically encoder-decoder architectures
are used, often with an attention mechanism (Bahdanau et al., 2015; Luong et al., 2015) or using
attention-based architectures such as the Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017). Generation is usually
performed using beam search; since output is tightly scoped by the input, repetition and generic-
ness are not as problematic. Still, similar issues have been reported when using large beam sizes
(Koehn & Knowles, 2017) and more recently with exact inference (Stahlberg & Byrne, 2019), a
counter-intuitive observation since more comprehensive search helps maximize probability.
Open-ended generation, which includes conditional story generation and contextual text continua-
tion (as in Figure 1), has recently become a promising research direction due to signiﬁcant advances
in neural language models (Clark et al., 2018; Holtzman et al., 2018; Fan et al., 2018; Peng et al.,
2018; Radford et al., 2019). While the input context restricts the space of acceptable output genera-
tions, there is a considerable degree of freedom in what can plausibly come next, unlike in directed
generation settings. Our work addresses the challenges faced by neural text generation with this
increased level of freedom, but we note that some tasks, such as goal-oriented dialog, may fall
somewhere in between open-ended and directed generation.
3 L ANGUAGE MODEL DECODING
Given an input text passage as context, the task of open-ended generation is to generate text that
forms a coherent continuation from the given context. More formally, given a sequence ofm tokens
x1 . . . xm as context, the task is to generate the next n continuation tokens to obtain the completed
sequence x1 . . . xm+n. We assume that models compute P (x1:m+n) using the common left-to-right
decomposition of the text probability,
P (x1:m+n) =
m+n∏
i=1
P (xi|x1 . . . xi−1), (1)
which is used to generate the generation token-by-token using a particular decoding strategy.
Maximization-base

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
dsfsadfd
An unprecedented number of mostly young whales have become stranded on 
the West Australian coast since 2008.
Poor nutrition has led to a rise in the number of stranded humpback whales on the 
West Australian coast, veterinary researchers have said. Carly Holyoake, from Murdoch 
University, at the Australian Veterinary Association's annual conference in Perth on 
Wednesday, said an unprecedented number of mostly young whales had become 
stranded on the coast since 2008.
There has been an unprecedented number of calves caught in the nets of whaling 
stations that operate in WA. Pilot whales continue to migrate to feeding grounds to 
feed their calves. They are now vulnerable due to the decline of wild populations; 
they are restricted to one breeding site each year. Image copyright Yoon Bo Kim But, 
with sharp decline in wild populations the size of the Petrels are shrinking and dwindling
population means there will only be room for a few new fowl.
Pumping Station #3 shut down due to construction damage Find more at: 
www.abc.net.au/environment/species-worry/
in-the-top-10-killer-whale-catastrophes-in-history.html
“In the top 10 killer whale catastrophes in history :
1) 1986: Up to 12 orcas struck by lightning ; many drowned and many more badly injured.
Last week's intense storms and a series of powerful cyclones have been officially blamed 
for the deaths of at leas t nine large fin whales near Whitsundays - the largest loss of any
species globally. The fin whales: packed in the belly of one killer whale thrashing madly
in fear as another tries to bring it to safety. When the colossal animal breached the
waters of Whitsundays, he'd been seen tagged for a decade .
The Australian Food Safety Authority has warned Australia's beaches may be revitalised
this year because healthy seabirds and seals have been on the move. More than 50,000 
seabirds, sea mammals and seah orses have been swept into the sea by the Holden 
CS118 and Adelaide Airport CS300 from 2013 . A major white-bat and umidauda 
migration across Australia is under way in Australia for the first time, with numbers 
reaching an estimated 50,000.
The number of stranded whales has increased by more than 50 per cent in the past year, 
with the number of stranded whales on the West Australian coast increasing by more 
than 50 per cent in the past year . The number of whales stranded on the West Australian 
coast has increased by more than 50 per cent in the past year, with the number of 
stranded whales on the West Australian coast increasing by more than 50 per cent in the 
past year.
Sampling, t=0.9
WebT ext
WebT ext
Beam Search, b=16
Pure Sampling
T op-k, k=640
T op-k, k=40, t=0.7
The whale's fate was confirmed late last week when the animal was found by fishermen 
off the coast of Bundaberg. Experts believe the whale was struck by a fishing vessel off 
the coast of Bundaberg , and died after being sucked into the ocean . The whale's fate 
was confirmed late last week when the animal was found by fishermen off the coast of 
Bundaberg.
Nucleus, p=0.95
Figure 3: Example generations continuing an initial sentence. Maximization and top- k truncation
methods lead to copious repetition (highlighted in blue), while sampling with and without tempera-
ture tends to lead to incoherence (highlighted in red). Nucleus Sampling largely avoids both issues.
likelihood. Since ﬁnding the optimum argmax sequence from recurrent neural language models or
Transformers is not tractable (Chen et al., 2018), common practice is to use beam search (Li et al.,
2016b; Shen et al., 2017; Wiseman et al., 2017). However, several recent studies on open-ended
generation have reported that maximization-based decoding does not lead to high quality text (Fan
et al., 2018; Holtzman et al., 2018).
3.1 N UCLEUS SAMPLING
We propose a new stochastic decoding method: Nucleus Sampling. The key idea is to use the shape
of the probability distribution to determin

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
probability 0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
I do n’t know .
Figure 4: The probability of a repeated phrase increases with each repetition, creating a positive
feedback loop. We found this effect to hold for the vast majority of phrases we tested, regardless of
phrase length or if the phrases were sampled randomly rather than taken from human text.
Figure 5: The probability mass assigned to partial human sentences. Flat distributions lead to many
moderately probable tokens, while peaked distributions concentrate most probability mass into just
a few tokens. The presence of ﬂat distributions makes the use of a small k in top- k sampling
problematic, while the presence of peaked distributions makes large k’s problematic.
Let p′ = ∑
x∈V (p) P (x|x1:i−1). The original distribution is re-scaled to a new distribution, from
which the next word is sampled:
P′(x|x1:i−1) =
{
P (x|x1:i−1)/p′ if x∈ V (p)
0 otherwise. (3)
In practice this means selecting the highest probability tokens whose cumulative probability mass
exceeds the pre-chosen threshold p. The size of the sampling set will adjust dynamically based on
the shape of the probability distribution at each time step. For high values ofp, this is a small subset
of vocabulary that takes up vast majority of the probability mass — the nucleus.
3.2 T OP-k SAMPLING
Top-k sampling has recently become a popular alternative sampling procedure (Fan et al., 2018;
Holtzman et al., 2018; Radford et al., 2019). Nucleus Sampling and top- k both sample from trun-
cated Neural LM distributions, differing only in the strategy of where to truncate. Choosing where
to truncate can be interpreted as determining the generative model’s trustworthy prediction zone.
At each time step, the top k possible next tokens are sampled from according to their relative prob-
abilities. Formally, given a distribution P (x|x1:i−1), we deﬁne its top- k vocabulary V (k)⊂ V as
the set of size k which maximizes ∑
x∈V (k) P (x|x1:i−1). Let p′ = ∑
x∈V (k) P (x|x1:i−1). The
distribution is then re-scaled as in equation 3, and sampling is performed based on that distribution.
Note that the scaling factor p′ can vary wildly at each time-step, in contrast to Nucleus Sampling.
Difﬁculty in choosing a suitable value of k While top-k sampling leads to considerably higher
quality text than either beam search or sampling from the full distribution, the use of a constant k is
5