Large Language Models are Fixated by Red
Herrings: Exploring Creative Problem Solving and
Einstellung Effect with the OnlyConnect Wall Dataset
Saeid Alavi Naeini1,3,4 Raeid Saqur2,4 Mozhgan Saeidi2,4,6 John Giorgi2,4,5 Babak Taati1,2,3,4
1Kite Research Institute, Toronto Rehabilitation Institute, University Health Network
2Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto
3Institute of Biomedical Engineering, University of Toronto 4Vector Institute for AI
5Donnelly Centre for Cellular & Biomolecular Research, University of Toronto
6Department of Biomedical Data Science, Stanford University
{saeid.alavi, john.giorgi}@mail.utoronto.ca
raeidsaqur@cs.toronto.edu, mozhgans@stanford.edu, babak.taati@uhn.ca
Abstract
The quest for human imitative AI has been an enduring topic in AI research since
its inception. The technical evolution and emerging capabilities of the latest cohort
of large language models (LLMs) have reinvigorated the subject beyond academia
to the cultural zeitgeist. While recent NLP evaluation benchmark tasks test some as-
pects of human-imitative behavior (e.g., BIG-bench’s ‘human-like behavior’ tasks),
few, if not none, examine creative problem solving abilities. Creative problem solv-
ing in humans is a well-studied topic in cognitive neuroscience with standardized
tests that predominantly use the ability to associate (heterogeneous) connections
among clue words as a metric for creativity. Exposure to misleading stimuli —
distractors dubbed red herrings — impede human performance in such tasks via the
fixation effect and Einstellung paradigm. In cognitive neuroscience studies, such
fixations are experimentally induced by pre-exposing participants to orthographi-
cally similar incorrect words to subsequent word-fragments or clues. The popular
British quiz show Only Connect’s Connecting Wall segment essentially mimics
Mednick’s Remote Associates Test (RAT) formulation with built-in, deliberate
red herrings, which makes it an ideal proxy task to explore and study the fixation
effect and Einstellung paradigm from cognitive neuroscience in LLMs. In this
paper, we present the novel Only Connect Wall (OCW) dataset and report results
from our evaluation of selected pre-trained language models and LLMs on creative
problem solving tasks like grouping clue words by heterogeneous connections and
identifying correct open knowledge domain connections in respective groups. We
synthetically generate two additional datasets: OCW-Randomized, OCW-WordNet
to further analyze our red-herrings hypothesis in language models. The code and
link to the dataset are available at https://github.com/TaatiTeam/OCW.
1 Introduction
The remarkable capabilities of state-of-the-art large language models (LLMs) [91], across a variety
of domains and downstream tasks [78, 10], have spurred their comparisons with artificial general
intelligence (AGI) [5, 14] and human-imitative AI [31] systems. The extraordinary leap in capabilities
of these LLMs over a short span — from the advent of transformer-based [ 69] pre-trained, context-
aware language models (PLMs) [ 52, 17, 40, 36, 53] circa 2018 to 2020, to the current and latest
cohort of increasingly larger (billions of parameters) LMs [59, 77, 57, 89, 16, 67, 18] spearheaded
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.
arXiv:2306.11167v4  [cs.CL]  8 Nov 2023

Wall D: Season 10, Episode 2
Wall A: Season 11, Episode 23
Gala Twelfth Bonfire Hen ——— night
Orlov Churchill Digby Tony Advert 
Animals
Burns Marx Clarke Bender Cigar 
Smokers
Canal Street Castro Chelsea Darlinghurst Gay Villages
Wall B: Season 12, Episode 27
Jazz Gala Honeygold Jonathan Apples
Healing Join Greg Show of Can Precede 
Hands
Pippin Merry Gaffer Sam Hobbits
Twill Duct Ticker Cassette Types of 
Tape
Wall C: Season 15, Episode 10
Cameo Fuji Bramley Jazz Apples
Amy Lady Bird Dakota Dwayne Johnsons
Thunder Magic Heat Celtics
US 
Basketball 
Teams
Gala Costume Goggles Pool Swimming 
———
Shrewsbury Wellington Ludlow Madeley Shropshire 
Towns
Bath Boarding Doge Cathode Begin with 
Animals
Chelsea Gum Snow Cowboy Boots
Bolt Bond Churchill Coward English 
Playwrights
Figure 1: Examples of Only Connect walls with ground-truth groupings (rows) and connections
(last column). Red herrings include orthographically identical words, e.g., Gala, Churchill and
Chelsea in different connected groups — Gala: Gala night, Apples, Swimming gala, Churchill:
Advert Animals, English Playwrights and Chelsea: Gay Villages, Boots — across walls. In Wall A
(top left), the clues Churchill, Marx, Castro provide misleading stimuli inducing plausible fixation
on historical figures within the wall.
by the OpenAI’s GPT series [13], notably ChatGPT [ 49] and GPT-4 [48] — justifiably warrants
such comparisons. Several natural language processing (NLP) benchmarks have been proposed to
standardize the evaluation of these LLMs, including MMLU [ 27], BIG-bench [ 66], HELM [ 38],
and Global-Bench [ 65]. The tasks inventory under these benchmarks are open (type of tasks)
and dynamic (rolling additions). While a subset of these tasks aims to test for human imitative
intelligence (e.g., nineteen tasks listed under the human-like behaviour category in BIG-bench), none
tests for creative problem solving abilities [44] — a hallmark of human-like intelligence [31].
Creative problem-solving by humans is a well-studied topic in cognitive neuroscience and human
behavioural sciences literature. These studies and methods use (word) associative fluency to model
and test creativity objectively [44, 9]. Empirical research in this context commonly employs single
or continuous word association tests that are variants of Mednick’s seminal Remote Associates
Test (RAT) [45]. Such tests entail finding connections or links among a presented group of words
using associations that can be heterogeneous (e.g., synonymy, semantic, compounding) [ 86, 43].
To exemplify, consider the cue words:{Tennis, Same, Head}. A correct connection in this triplet is:
Match, which connects by semantic link (tennis match), synonymy (same match), and compound-
ing (match head). Further, the word connections can also vary in degrees of figurativeness (e.g.,
Star-Actress vs. Star-Planet) and abstractness (e.g., Humor-Sense vs. Apple-Tree). In humans,
such creative problem-solving abilities are impeded by exposure to wrong answers [61, 62, 85] — a
finding referred to as the fixation effect [34, 82]. A closely related similar concept is the Einstellung
effect [42], which postulates the negative effect of previous experience when solving new problems.
Studies examining the fixation effect induce fixations by presenting clue words intended as wrong an-
swers (misleading stimuli) [61] dubbed “red herrings” or, by pre-exposing participants to red herrings
before attempting creative problem-solving tasks like the RAT [45]. A slew of works in negative
transfer learning in human cognition attempt to explain the RAT fixation phenomenon that involves
pre-exposure to red herrings by the negative effects of prior learning on indirect or implicit measures
of memory [63]. This negative transfer effect was demonstrated and studied using orthographically
similar words to subsequent test word fragments as red herrings [63]. Intuitively, the red herrings
lead participants away from the memory retrieval (or down incorrect

as measured with RAT problems. Two such factors are repetition and context. A following corollary
states that the memory strengths of red herrings determine the magnitude of a fixation effect [8].
In this work, we study the juxtaposition of these theories from human cognitive neuroscience (fixations,
negative transfer learning, red herring memory retrieval hypothesis) from the context of LLMs and
natural language processing. While negative transfer learning has been observed and studied in AI
research [76, 22], the context of these studies is limited to strict machine learning sub-domains like
statistical distribution measures and computer vision. There has not been any work that systematically
examines these specific concepts’ relation in AI research. Our major contributions are as follow:
1. Only Connect Wall (OCW) Dataset and creative problem solving tasks. We introduce a
novel dataset for evaluating creative problem solving tasks by curating the problems and human
performance results from the popular British quiz show Only Connect [ 81, 3]. Specifically, the
Connecting Walls segment of the show, where the tasks entail grouping sixteen (16) jumbled up clue
words into four (4) connected groups, and naming the correct connections (Figure 1). The presented
words have heterogeneous connections with open-domain knowledge retrieval, e.g., history, places,
famous people, tools, and cultural references. These ‘walls’ contain red herrings or misleading
stimuli by design, which makes this dataset an analogical proxy for RAT tests in evaluating LLMs for
creative problem-solving. Section §2 provides a detailed description of the dataset.
2. Experiments, results, and key findings of baseline LLMs evaluation. We evaluate a suite of
NLP models from static embeddings to PLMs to LLMs and demonstrate that none can solve the tasks
of the OCW dataset. Our findings show that SOTA LLMs (e.g. GPT-4 [48]) perform significantly
worse than the expert human baseline, and somewhat surprisingly, that increasing the number of
in-context examples in few-shot in-context-learning is ineffective. Sections §3 and §4 provide details.
2 Only Connect Walls Dataset
Here we focus on the Connecting Walls segment (usually the third round) of the quiz-show. Each
wall contains sixteen jumbled-up word clues that must be sorted into four groups, each with four
connected words. Once the groups are formed, contestants must also identify the right connection or
relationship among the items in each group. While there is only one correct solution to each wall,
the puzzles are designed to include several red herring clues that can fit into another category and
red herring categories fitting multiple clues. Figure 1 shows solved sample walls from the show
highlighting a couple of typical red herrings.
2.1 Dataset Collection and Structure
The OCW dataset contains 618 connecting wall puzzles and solutions in total from 15 seasons of the
show. Each show episode has two walls. The total number of walls per season varies based on the
(varying) number of aired season episodes. The walls were scraped from fan websites1, and human
performance results (for grouping and connection tasks) were manually curated by watching all the
episodes. Figure 2 depicts the high-level structure of the dataset in JSON format with self-explanatory
object keys and comments.
2.2 Tasks and Evaluation Metrics
The two dataset tasks: Task 1 (Grouping), and Task 2 (Connections)are identical to the quiz-show’s
human participant tasks. We evaluate Task 1 (Groupings) via six metrics: number of solved walls,
number of correct groups (max. four per wall), Adjusted Mutual Information (AMI) [71], Adjusted
Rand Index (ARI) [28], Fowlkes Mallows Score (FMS) [21], and Wasserstein Distance (WD) [54],
normalized to (0, 1) range, between predicted and ground-truth labels [88, 70].
We similarly evaluate Task 2 (Connections) with three metrics: exact string matching, ROUGE-1
F1 [39], and BERTScore F1 [90]. Exact match is th

Predicted Connection Ground-truth Connection Exact Match ROUGE-1 F1 BERTScore F1
Types of numbers Types of numbers 1.00 1.00 1.00
Slang terms for money Slang for money 0.00 0.86 0.79
Types of trees Trees 0.00 0.50 0.63
Bridges in London Thames bridges 0.00 0.40 0.31
Medieval occupations Chaucer characters 0.00 0.00 0.15
Table 1: Examples of predicted and ground-truth connections and their performance according to the
chosen metrics. Exact match is 0 for anything but identical strings. Empirically, we observe that a
ROUGE-1/BERTScore F1 of ≥ 0.5 indicates that a predicted connection is likely correct.
connection and a low proportion of non-ground truth tokens. BERTScore F1 is similar but further
relaxes this criterion, assigning a non-zero score for semantically similar (but non-identical) predicted
tokens. Together these three metrics provide a more holistic view of model performance on Task 2
than any one metric alone. Empirically, we find that a ROUGE-1 or BERTScore F1 of≥ 0.5 indicates
that a predicted connection would likely be considered correct (Table 1). Note that BERTScore has
many parameters affecting the final score; a hashcode is produced and reported for reproducibility.
Each of the evaluation metrics for Task 1 of Task 2 could be calculated per wall, per episode, per
season, or for the entire test set. We present results on the entire test set in this paper (§4). We split
the dataset into a train set (62 walls), validation set (62 walls), and test set (494 walls). The primary
goal of our dataset is to evaluate the zero- and few-shot creative problem-solving abilities of LLMs;
as such, we elect to set the size of the test set to be much greater than train or validation sets.
3 Experiments: Language Model Evaluations
This section describes methods and models used to provide baseline results for the dataset. For
Task 1 (Grouping), we use clustering techniques on word-embeddings from classical and pre-trained
language models (PLMs) (§3.1), and few-shot in-context learning (ICL) with LLMs (§3.2). For Task
2 (Connections), we only provide baseline results using few-shot ICL with LLMs (§3.2).
Figure 2: JSON Structure of the OCW dataset. One truncated example is shown.
4

Hesse
Mann
Schiller
Sneak
Beaters bat
Quaffle
Shop
Grimm
Taxis
Bludger
Grass
Broomstick
Journalism
Synthesis
Graph
Snitch
HesseMann
Schiller
Sneak
Beaters bat
Quaffle
Shop
Grimm
Taxis
Bludger
Grass
Broomstick
Journalism
Synthesis
Graph
Snitch
Group 1: German-born writers
Group 2: Quidditch equipment
Group 3: Betray
Group 4: Photo___
Figure 3: Solved wall ( wall_id="8cde") for Task 1 (Grouping) using best performing
model (E5BASE) with both static and contextual embeddings. Left: solved wall using static em-
beddings. Right: unsolved wall using contextual embeddings. 2D projection of embeddings using
t-SNE is shown. Colors and shapes correspond to true clusters, and grey convex regions correspond
to predicted clusters. The legend shows the ground truth connection for each group.
3.1 Task 1: Grouping using Word Embeddings
For the grouping task evaluation (§2.2), we use clustering algorithms on word-embeddings of the
sixteen clue words in each wall, to group them into four predicted groups that are subsequently
evaluated against the four ground-truth groups for each wall. A vanilla k-means (with k = 4 )
clustering algorithm [25] does not guarantee each predicted group to have four words, thus we use
variants like constrained clustering.
Clustering Semi-supervised constrained clustering [72, 7] is used when the user has pre-existing
knowledge about the desired partition (in our case, 4 groups). Here, we adopt a minimum cost flow
network clustering approach [12] with a cluster size of four for grouping. Our preliminary analysis
showed that clustering results exhibited slight variations across runs. This slight discrepancy could
be attributed to the initializations of cluster centroids. To address this issue and ensure reliable
results, we report the mean and variance of results (Table 3)across sixteen (16) runs, each with
a unique seed and randomized order of sixteen-word clues. We tested two additional clustering
approaches motivated by [47, 19]: (1) We constructed a self-similarity matrix containing pair-wise
similar information about the words prior to applying constrained clustering; (2) We performed
dimensionality reduction using Principal Component Analysis (PCA) [58] and t-distributed stochastic
neighbor embedding (t-SNE) [68] before applying constrained clustering. Neither approach improved
performance over raw embeddings’ clusters, and, for brevity, results are not included.
Static word embedding We used two well-known classic word embedding models, GloVe [51] and
FastText [23], both of which are accessed through the Flair library (Table 2). We used two FastText
models, one pre-trained on the Common Crawl corpus and another on Wikipedia. Approximately
10% of the total clues encountered in the dataset were out-of-vocabulary (OOV). A significant
portion (~80%) of the OOV cases were addressed by mean pooling for clues comprised of multiple
words to obtain one unified embedding. For the remaining OOV instances, we combined the static
embeddings with BytePair encoded[26] sub-words.
PLMs We explored general-purpose PLMs (BERT [ 17], RoBERTa [ 40], DistilBERT [ 56],
ELMo [52]) as well as Sentence Transformers (MPNet [ 64], E5 [ 75]; see Table 2). We evalu-
ated performance with and without contextual embeddings.2 Depending on the context, some clues
in the dataset may appear across different walls with different meanings. As an example, the word
2Static embeddings are obtained from the PLMs by passing clues through the model independently.
5