Published as a conference paper at COLM 2025
NOVELTY BENCH : Evaluating Language Models for Human-
like Diversity
Yiming Zhang∗ Harshita Diddee Susan Holm Hanchen Liu
Xinyue Liu Vinay Samuel Barry Wang Daphne Ippolito
Carnegie Mellon University
Abstract
Language models have demonstrated remarkable capabilities on standard
benchmarks, yet they struggle increasingly from mode collapse, the inabil-
ity to generate diverse and novel outputs. Our work introduces NOVEL -
TYBENCH , a benchmark specifically designed to evaluate the ability of
language models to produce multiple distinct and high-quality outputs.
NOVELTY BENCH utilizes prompts curated to elicit diverse answers and
filtered real-world user queries. Evaluating 20 leading language models, we
find that current state-of-the-art systems generate significantly less diversity
than human writers. Notably, larger models within a family often exhibit
less diversity than their smaller counterparts, challenging the notion that
capability on standard benchmarks translates directly to generative utility.
While prompting strategies like in-context regeneration can elicit diversity,
our findings highlight a fundamental lack of distributional diversity in
current models, reducing their utility for users seeking varied responses
and suggesting the need for new training and evaluation paradigms that
prioritize diversity alongside quality.1
1 Introduction
Diversity of opinion, preference, and experience is a fundamental trait of being human. If
you were to ask “Tell me a joke” or “What is the best book of all time?” to the next five
people you talk to, with high likelihood you would receive five different answers. It is
reasonable to expect language models to generate responses that have the same level of
diversity as humans. Yet, when we ask models such as GPT-4 to recommend a movie or
Claude 3 to suggest several vacation destinations, we often receive variations of the same
few ideas—a phenomenon known as mode collapse Hamilton (2024).
This lack of diversity in language model outputs represents a significant limitation. To-
day’s aligned language models tend to produce lower entropy distributions than earlier
generations of models (Zhang et al., 2024b), and when asked to generate (using random
sampling) several responses to an open-ended prompt, the responses will often contain
substantial near-duplicates (O’Mahony et al., 2024). This tendency can harm the utility of
these models for subjective tasks where different users may have diverging preferences and
needs (Zhang et al., 2024a). Sorensen et al. (2024) refer to the inability of today’s LLMs to
produce diverse generations as a failure of pluralistic alignment, which can lead to less useful
and customizable AI systems.
While today’s LLMs are evaluated at great length for knowledge and reasoning abilities, they
are rarely evaluated for response diversity, and there are no widely-adopted benchmarks
for assessing this trait. The majority of existing evaluation benchmarks are “mode-seeking”,
in the sense that they only assess the quality of the most likely generation of language
∗Correspondence to <yimingz3@cs.cmu.edu>.
1Code and data are available at https://novelty-bench.github.io.
1
arXiv:2504.05228v4  [cs.CL]  9 Aug 2025

Published as a conference paper at COLM 2025
 1) Parallel lines have so much in common.
 2) A boiled egg is hard to beat.
3) Parallel lines: So much in common.
k) I ate a clock. Very time-consuming.
…
 = #ClustersDistinctk
 = Sum of novel answer 
utilities, with diminishing returns
Utilityk
Prompt: Tell me a short joke
LLM generates k candidates
Candidates are clustered
1
3
… 2
…
k
(           )+(           )+(           )+… (           )  u u u u1 2 k3
Candidate utilities are evaluated
1
2
3
4
Figure 1: NOVELTY BENCH overview. We partition generations into functional equivalence
classes and introduce two metrics: distinct k counts unique equivalence classes among k
samples, and utilityk combines novelty and quality, weighing utility of individual genera-
tions by user patience (p = 0.8) and only considering novel generations.
models and do not assess the capability of models to produce meaningful alternatives. 2
This evaluation paradigm is problematic because it creates misaligned incentives: model
developers focus on improving the quality of the single most likely generation rather than
the diversity of the entire distribution of possible outputs.
In this work, we set out to measure not only what language models can generate, but
also what they cannot. To this end, we propose NOVELTY BENCH (Figure 1), a benchmark
for measuring how well language models can generate multiple differing but still correct
answers to user requests that involve subjectivity, randomness, and creativity—in other
words, queries that a room of humans would produce a large variety of answers to. We
intend for our benchmark to serve as a complement to existing quality-based evaluation
benchmarks, encouraging model developers to strive toward more pluralistic models, while
also taking generation quality into account.
In summary, we introduce NOVELTY BENCH , a benchmark consisting of 1,100 prompts that
we expect to elicit variable answers from humans, 100 of which are annotated with responses
from eight human annotators. We propose a unified measure of novelty and quality which
can be used to gauge how well an LLM can produce diverse, high-quality responses to a
given prompt. We evaluate NOVELTY BENCH on twenty frontier models, including GPT-4o,
Claude 3.5 Sonnet and Gemini 2.0 Pro, and find that all suffer from a lack of diversity. Our
evaluation further reveals that larger and more capable models in the same model family
tend to produce less diverse outputs, highlighting a concerning trend in the development of
state-of-the-art language models. These findings underscore the need for future work on
training techniques that promote diversity alongside quality, and for evaluation paradigms
that better reflect the full spectrum of human preferences and creative capabilities.
2 Related Work
Prior work has established that language model outputs often exhibit biases towards specific
demographic groups (Santurkar et al., 2023; Sun et al., 2023), genders (del Arco et al., 2024),
countries (Durmus et al., 2023), or personas (Giorgi et al., 2024; Oketunji et al., 2023).
This homogenization can limit LLM utility on downstream tasks (Agarwal et al., 2024;
2In an analysis of 67 benchmark papers published at COLM 2024 and ICLR 2025, we found that
over 90% of these papers evaluate language models based on a single/best generation, instead of
considering the full model output distribution.
2

Published as a conference paper at COLM 2025
Song et al., 2024). Research into diversifying language model outputs has seen several
promising directions. Common approaches include adjusting decoding methods, such
as increasing temperature (Shur-Ofry et al., 2024; Peeperkorn et al., 2024), or modifying
training objectives (Li et al., 2016; Zhang et al., 2024b; Li et al., 2024; Lanchantin et al., 2025).
The idea that we should evaluate language models not only on the quality of their gen-
erations but also on their diversity is not entirely new. The 2020 Duolingo Shared Task
involved generating several diverse but still correct translations of an input sentence (May-
hew et al., 2020). Recent work by Cheng et al. (2024) further highlights the probabilistic
nature of commonsense knowledge in language models, and proposed an probabilistic eval-
uation method for commonsense knowledge that relies on open-ended generation instead
of multiple-choice questions. Numerous studies of NLG systems have proposed metrics
for evaluating diversity, based on perplexity (Lewis et al., 2017; Fan et al., 2018), n-gram
overlaps (Zhu et al., 2018; Shu et al., 2019; Duˇsek et al., 2020), and embedding distances (Du
& Black, 2019). However, existing metrics often correlate poorly with human judgments
of content diversity (Tevet & Berant, 2021). In contrast to prior work, NOVELTY BENCH
uniquely evaluates an LLM’s capacity to generate a set of outputs that are simultaneously
diverse and high-quality.
3 Benchmark
Our benchmark evaluates language model diversity using two distinct datasets: NB-
CURATED which contains 100 prompts manually curated by the authors, and NB-
WILD CHAT which consists of 1,000 prompts automatically curated from real user interac-
tions with ChatGPT. LLM performance on the benchmark is evaluated based on the quality
and novelty of the set of generations produced by the LLM.
3.1 Dataset Curation
To test language models’ capabilities to produce novel generations, we need a dataset
of prompts that elicit diverse responses. We developed two sets of such prompts: NB-
CURATED contains prompts designed by the authors to have multiple valid answers,
while NB-W ILD CHAT is a collection of 1,000 prompts sourced from the WildChat-1M
dataset (Zhao et al., 2023).
NB-C URATED . The curated dataset is designed to contain four distinct categories where
diversity is expected.
• Randomness: prompts that involve randomizing over a set of options.
Example: Roll a make-believe 20-sided die.
• Factual Knowledge : prompts that request underspecified factual information,
which allow many valid answers.
Example: List a capital city in Africa.
• Creative Writing: prompts that involve generating a creative form of text, including
poetry, and story-writing.
Example: Tell me a riddle.
• Subjectivity: prompts that request subjective answers or opinions.
Example: What’s the best car to get in 2023?
The authors of the paper then write responses to each of the prompts, resulting in 8 human
responses per prompt. Since this is a rather homogeneous set of human annotators (all
work/study at the same institution), we expect this response set to represent an approximate
lower bound on actual human diversity. However, as we will show in Section 4.3, even this
group produced more diverse responses than most state-of-the-art language models.
NB-W ILD CHAT. WildChat is a collection of 1M real user conversations with ChatGPT,
which is a valuable resource for understandingreal user needs of creativitysince they represent
usage of language models in the wild. However, we cannot use this dataset directly because
3

Published as a conference paper at COLM 2025
the vast majority of its prompts do not allow for multiple valid answers.During processing,
we first used Llama Guard 3 (Chi et al., 2024) to filter out inappropriate user prompts. A
small number of IPs contributed a disproportionately high number of interactions, leading
to topic bias (e.g., towards anime); we deduplicated the dataset based on user IP to achieve
a more even topic distribution.After preprocessing, we used GPT-4o as a classifier to select
prompts expected to elicit diverse generations. 3 To make sure that the selected prompts
match the desired criteria, we manually labeled 100 prompts from the dataset (with 50
accepted and 50 rejected by GPT-4o), and found an 85% agreement between the classifier
and the human labels. Randomly sampled prompts from this dataset are provided in
Appendix A.3.
3.2 Evaluating Novelty
Models with diversity alone would not be sufficient for users: each of the individual genera-
tions should also be of high quality, with the ultimate goal of maximizing the cumulative
utility of a user who interacts with the model. Thus, our evaluation framework aims to
assess the extent to which the set of responses is mutually diverse and simultaneously
high-quality, and our key metric directly models the cumulative utility for a user who
observes a sequence of generations from a language model.
Partitioning the output space. Defining diversity with automatic metrics is challenging
due to the complex nature of language. Traditional metrics like n-gram overlap or embed-
ding similarity often fail to capture meaningful diversity, as they may either overemphasize
trivial differences (e.g., paraphrasing) or miss important semantic distinctions. Prior work
has attempted to measure diversity using lexical variation (Li et al., 2016), embedding
distances (Zhang et al., 2019), or entropy-based measures (Du ˇsek et al., 2020), but these
approaches typically struggle to distinguish between functional diversity and surface-level
variations that provide little additional value to users (Tevet & Berant, 2021).
Accordingly, to understand the diversity of the output space of language models, we propose
a method that learns to partition the output space into equivalence classes from human
annotations. Each class represents one unique generation that is roughly equivalent to the
others in the same class and different from the generations in other classes.
Partitioning the output space boils down to defining a notion of equivalence between pairs
of generations. Language model outputs can be trivially different from each other (e.g.,
in terms of style, tone, or length). We argue that true diversity should go beyond these
surface-level differences, since such variations provide little utility to the user. Therefore,
we mainly consider functional equivalence in the context of this work, which defines two
generations to be different if and only if a user who has seen one generation would likely
benefit from seeing the other. For example, in a story generation task, if two generations
are retelling the original story with identical plot, but different character names, then we
consider them to be functionally equivalent.
While this definition of functional equivalence is intuitive for human evaluators, it is non-
trivial to capture this notion of equivalence using existing similarity metrics.4 To this end,
the authors annotated 1,100 pairs of generations conditioned on prompts from both the
NB-C URATED and NB-W ILD CHAT datasets sampled from a diverse set of models (see
Table 1 for a list of models). For annotation, we developed guidelines that focused on
identifying whether two generations would provide distinct value to a user, rather than just
surface-level differences.
From these annotated pairs, we used 1,000 for training and fine-tuned a deberta-v3-large
model (He et al., 2021) to predict binary functional equivalence between two generations.
To ensure that the classifier mat

Published as a conference paper at COLM 2025
of 100 pairs. The classifier achieved 79% accuracy compared to human labels, with an F1
score of 0.811, indicating strong performance on both positive and negative classes.
With the equivalence classifier, we can partition the output space into equivalence classes.
For each new generation, we compare it against a random generation from each existing
class. If the classifier determines it is functionally equivalent to any existing class, we assign
it to the first such class found; otherwise, we create a new class with this generation. We
define the distinctk metric as the number of equivalence classes in a partition of k sample
generations from a language model:
distinctk := |{ci | i ∈ [k]}| (1)
where ci is the equivalence class that the i-th generation belongs to. For a sufficiently large k,
distinctk quantifies the number of meaningfully unique generations that a user could have
observed by sampling from the model k times. A higher score indicates that the model is
better at producing meaningful alternatives to the most likely generation.
Unified measure of diversity and quality. How do we measure the cumulative utility
of a sequence of generations s1, s2, . . ., sk? To achieve this, we first need a model of user
behavior that describes how users interact with and consume language model generations.
Inspired by the user model underlying the rank-biased precision metric in information
retrieval (Moffat & Zobel, 2008), we assume that the user has a patience level p ∈ [0, 1]: after
observing each additional generation, they have a probability p of requesting an additional
generation from the language model and observing the next generation, and a probability
1 − p of stopping interacting with the model. In other words, each additional generation
should have a geometrically decaying effect on utility since it is more likely that the user
simply would not have observed it.
To model the marginal utility of a distinct generation, we assume that the utility of a
generation that is functionally equivalent to a previous generation is zero. Under our user
model with patience p, the cumulative utility of a sequence of generations is given by:
utilityk := 1 − p
1 − pk
k
∑
i=1
pi−1 · 1

ci ̸= cj, ∀j < i

· ui
| {z }
marginal utility of generation i
(2)
where ci is the equivalence class of the i-th generation, ui is the utility of the i-th generation
given by some utility function, and 1−p
1−pk is a normalization factor. In our evaluation setup,
we set the patience level to 0.8. Note that asp → 0, the metric converges to quality evaluation
of a single generation, the de facto standard in language model evaluation.
Computing utility. We use the Skywork-Reward-Gemma-2-27B-v0.2 model (Liu et al., 2024)
to score the quality of individual generations. We chose this reward model because it is
one of the top performing models on RewardBench (Lambert et al., 2024), and outperforms
larger models such as Nvidia’s 70B Nemotron model (Wang et al., 2024).
The reward scores produced by the reward model are real-valued and difficult to interpret
for humans. To map these scores into a more interpretable utility measure that outputs
values in {1, 2,. . ., 10}, we computed the distribution of reward values for 2,400 model
generations on MT-Bench (Zheng et al., 2023) and used quality scores judged by GPT-4 to
calibrate the reward mapping to match the score distributions.
4 Evaluation Results on N OVELTY BENCH
4.1 Models considered
We are particularly interested in the behavior of “aligned” language models which have been
adapted using supervised finetuning and/or reinforcement learning to be conversational,
instruction-following, and helpful. In particular, we consider a list of 20 state-of-the-art
5